Module 12: The impact of digital technology on photography 

Please complete the material

Images requirements: It is required to take/create at least 6 photos (no limit for the maximum number). Take photographs that will illustrate your elaborations and explain the role of digital photography.  

Please elaborate why you took the photos in a certain way and make a connection between your images and the questions bellow.

- How digital technology changed the role of photography in the society?

- What has been the impact of digital photography on journalism?

- What about fake photographs and fake news? Users of social media do not follow any codes of ethics. How will news media protect the audience from fake photos and fake news? Can/should they do this?




jose van dijck article:

The student took a photo of themselves and their friends relaxing in her dorm. It was edited to include beer bottles on the floor. This was not her intention for the photo. She had taken it to add it to her photoblog for her friends and family to see her college adventures while at home. 

What if I were one of the students? 

I would probably be mildly upset, and then prove its inauthenticity. This can be done because when people photoshop pictures to add something, they often don't pay attention to the pixel densities and ratios. Forensic tools can be used to analyze the pixel densities in the photo to tell if there has been any manipulation. These days it is fairly a fairly elementary operation to prove the validity of a photograph. This also goes for "photographs" generated by artificial intelligence models. Forensic tools exist to analyse both of these fairly easily. 

This is one area in which a skilled analog photo editor would excell in. This would make it much more difficult to analyse if the original image was scanned and uploaded instead. 

then post the results online. Am I feeding the trolls? maybe, but it would also help clear my image in that situation.

The article talks about personal photography being mainly for autobiographical. I am not sure that I would agree with that take. Personal photography was also commonly used to show off before digital technology, for example slide shows (that means something different today) of someone's holiday. They take pictures of their best moments, the most gorgeous views, the most exciting nights. Personal photography has never not been unbiased. While it is true that with a modern camera, you have nearly infinite tries to take a picture, that does not mean that an analog camera more accurately captures reality. This result is fully reliant on the person behind the camera. If they happen to enjoy photography, they might spend more time analysing the scene, the appropreate film sensitivity to choose for the light levels, the apature, film with different "feels" (a lot of modern filters are designed to model famous rolls of film), the zoom level, and finally the composition. All of these decisions can alter how the subject looks in the resulting photo. 

(put photos of different zoom levels)

This all to say that while the amount of showing off and identity formulation happens more these days, it was never not a thing. I also think that it is important to separate the concepts of the effect on digitalization to photography and the effect on digitalization to human communication. 

Photography has changed a bit in the last 50 years. We have transitioned from DSLRs in homes to point-and-shoots in every dad's belt holster. Then from film point-and-shoots to early digital DSLRs. Then we got early pocketable digital point-and-shoots. After the point-and-shoots we got early PDAs and camera phones (back when it wasn't normal to have a camera on the phone that's what they were called). From that we graduated to featurephones and blackberries. This is when photo sharing through MMS (before MMS, it was not possible to share media through SMS) and the internet became a daily activity. Finally the technology was decent enough (0.2-0.5MP!) to take communicable photos and instantly send them to someone else. 

Things changed a bit again when the iPhone was released. Even early smartphones had cameras, compatibility with the internet, and with social media. This made it incredibly simple to take a photograph and send it off without another thought. 

The internet changes the way people use photography, bnu